[KB-184] Defining Gradient Boost regression (#152)
chhoumann/thesis-chemcam: report_thesis/src/sections/background.tex

\subsubsection{Extra Trees Regressor (ETR)}

\subsubsection{Gradient Boosting Regression (GBR)}\label{sec:gradientboost}
In this section we introduce \gls{gbr} primarily based on \citet{James2023AnIS}.
Gradient boosting builds on simpler concepts and incorporates the idea of ensemble learning, with decision trees and boosting as its core components.

Ensemble learning is a technique in machine learning where multiple models, known as \textit{weak learners}, are combined to produce more accurate predictions.
Mathematically, ensemble learning can be defined as combining the predictions of $M$ weak learners to form a final prediction $\hat{y}$, such that:
\begin{equation}

>     \hat{y} = \sum_{m=1}^{M} \alpha_m \hat{y}_m

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \hat{y} = \sum_{m=1}^{M} \alpha_m \hat{y}_m,
```

\end{equation}
where $\hat{y}_m$ is the prediction of the $m$-th weak learner and $\alpha_m$ is the weight assigned to the $m$-th weak learner.

> Although various options exist for weak learners, decision trees are commonly used and have been selected for this study.

Reviewer: Since this is the background section, I don't think we should mention anything about our methodology here.

Decision trees partition the data into subsets based on feature values, aiming to create groups where the data points are more similar in their predicted outcomes. 
This similarity, or homogeneity, is measured in terms of impurity, which is a measure of how mixed the data points are within a region. 
This is achieved through recursive binary splitting, dividing the dataset into two regions based on the value of a predictor. 
The goal at each step is to select the predictor and the split point that result in the greatest reduction in impurity.

Impurity, in the context of decision trees, is measured using the residual sum of squares (RSS). For any predictor $X_j$ and split point $s$, the data is divided into two regions $R1$ and $R2$ defined as:
$$
\begin{aligned}
    R1(j, s) &= \{X | X_j < s\} \\
    R2(j, s) &= \{X | X_j \geq s\}
\end{aligned}
$$
The goal is to find the values of $j$ and $s$ that minimize the RSS, calculated as:
$$
    \sum_{i: x_i \in R1(j, s)} (y_i - \hat{y}_{R1})^2 + \sum_{i: x_i \in R2(j, s)} (y_i - \hat{y}_{R2})^2
$$

> where $\hat{y}_{R1}$ and $\hat{y}_{R2}$ are the mean responses for the training observations in regions $R1$ and $R2$, respectively.

Reviewer: Impurity is just one of several metrics you can use to evaluate splits in a decision tree. There's also things like information gain. Why are you spending so much time explaining this specific evaluation metric in a section about gradient boosting? I don't think there's any reason to include that here. I would much rather we just say something like "...based on some evaluation metric", and perhaps list some examples. We are supposed to define gradient boosting in this section, not decision trees, and especially not model evaluation metrics.

Once optimal splits are identified, the tree is constructed by repeating this process for each subset until a stopping criterion is met. 
The final model consists of splits that create distinct regions, each with a predicted response value based on the mean of the observations in that region.

The method ensures that each region is more homogeneous with respect to the target variable, effectively reducing impurity and making the data points within each region more similar.

The predictions from the decision trees can then be improved by growing the trees sequentially, with each new tree correcting the errors of the previous ones. 

> This technique is referred to as \textit{Gradient Boosting}. 

Reviewer: Very late to introduce what gradient boosting actually means.

Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's predictions. 
It also ensures that each tree makes small and simple error corrections, such that each step refines the model's performance more reliably.
Finally, small trees have the property of high bias, meaning that they are unable to capture complex relationships in the data and low variance.
By combining multiple small trees, the model can capture complex relationships while maintaining a low variance.

The model is constructed iteratively by adding trees to correct the residuals of the previous trees. 
Initially, the prediction is set as $\hat{f}_0(x) = 0$ and residuals as $r_i = y_i$ for all $i$ in the training set. 
At each iteration $b$, predictions are updated as:
$$

>     \hat{f}(x) = \hat{f}(x) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(x)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \hat{f}(x) = \hat{f}(x) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(x),
```

$$

> where $\hat{f}_b(x)$ is the prediction of the $b$-th tree and $\lambda$ is the learning rate. Residuals, representing the errors to be corrected by the next tree, are updated as:

Reviewer: Why define residuals here when you've mentioned it earlier? Should define it when you first mention it.

$$
    r_i = y_i - \hat{f}(x)
$$
Each tree is then trained on these updated residuals. This process of fitting a weak learner to predict the residuals and using its predictions to update the model is repeated for $B$ iterations, culminating in the final model:
$$
    \hat{f}(x) = \sum_{b=1}^{B} \lambda \hat{f}_b(x) 
$$
This final formulation effectively reduces errors by moving in the direction of the steepest descent as dictated by the gradient of the loss function. The commonly used squared error loss function is:
$$
L = \frac{1}{2}(y - \hat{y})^2
$$
which is continuous and differentiable, facilitating the computation of the gradient and ensuring stable optimization paths. The gradient, defined as:
$$
    \nabla L = y - \hat{f}(x),
$$
guides the model adjustments to efficiently reduce errors. 

> The learning rate $\lambda$ moderates the size of these adjustments, helping to maintain stability and prevent overfitting as the model iteratively fits to the residual errors~\cite{gradientLossFunction}.

Reviewer: This part of the section is missing a ton of definitions for the mathematical symbols. Many symbols are undefined, and some are defined several lines after they are first introduced. Also, consider whether we event *need* all of these formulas. We decided to exclude most mathematical formulas from most of the other sections in the interest of brevity, and we only kept the most essential ones, which I don't think applies to this section.

As a tradeoff, \gls{etr} is less interpretable than a single decision tree, as the added randomness can introduce more bias than \gls{rf}.
However, it often achieves better generalization performance, especially in high-dimensional or noisy datasets.

\subsubsection{Gradient Boosting Regression (GBR)}\label{sec:gradientboost}
In this section we introduce \gls{gbr} primarily based on \citet{James2023AnIS}.
\gls{gbr} is an ensemble learning method that builds models sequentially, each one trying to correct the errors of the previous one, using gradient descent and boosting techniques.

> However, in order to explain \gls{gbr}, it is helpful to build on the concepts of ensemble learning and decision trees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand \gls{gbr}, it is helpful to build on the concepts of ensemble learning and decision trees.
```

Initially, the prediction is set as $\hat{f}_0(\mathbf{x}) = 0$ and residuals as $r_i = y_i$ for all $i$ in the training set, where $\mathbf{x}$ represents the vector of input feature(s) and $y$ is the true value or target variable.
The model is then iteratively improved over $B$ iterations, where $B$ is a hyperparameter controlling the total number of trees.
With each iteration $b$ from $1$ to $B$, predictions are updated as:
$$
    \hat{f}^{(b)}(\mathbf{x}) = \hat{f}^{(b-1)}(\mathbf{x}) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x}),
$$
where $\hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x})$ is the prediction of the $b$-th tree and $\lambda$ is the learning rate. Residuals are updated as:
$$
    r_i^{(b)} = y_i - \hat{f}^{(b-1)}(\mathbf{x}_i),
$$
Each tree is then trained on these updated residuals.
The repetitive process of fitting a weak learner to predict the residuals and using its predictions to update the model gives us the final model:
$$
    \hat{f}(\mathbf{x}) = \sum_{b=1}^{B} \lambda \hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x})
$$
In the context of regression, gradient boosting aims to minimize the difference between the predicted values and the actual target values by fitting successive trees to the residuals.

> To minimize errors, gradient descent is used, effectively reducing errors by moving in the direction of the steepest descent as dictated by the gradient of the loss function~\cite{gradientLossFunction}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize errors, gradient descent is used to iteratively update model parameters in the direction of the negative gradient of the loss function, thereby following the path of steepest descent~\cite{gradientLossFunction}.
```

Once optimal splits are identified, the tree is constructed by repeatedly partitioning the data until a stopping criterion is met.
The final model consists of splits that create distinct regions, each with a predicted response value based on the mean of the observations in that region.

This leads us to \textit{gradient boosting}.
Instead of building a single decision tree, gradient boosting constructs multiple trees sequentially, with each new tree correcting the errors of the previous ones.
Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's predictions. 
It also ensures that each tree makes small and simple error corrections, such that each step refines the model's performance more reliably.

Initially, the prediction is set as $\hat{f}_0(\mathbf{x}) = 0$ and residuals as $r_i = y_i$ for all $i$ in the training set, where $\mathbf{x}$ represents the vector of input feature(s) and $y$ is the true value or target variable. 
The model is then iteratively improved over $B$ iterations, where $B$ is a hyperparameter controlling the total number of trees.
At each iteration $b \in \{1, 2, \ldots, B\}$, predictions are updated as:
$$

>     \hat{f}(\mathbf{x}) = \hat{f}(\mathbf{x}) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \hat{f}^{(b)}(\mathbf{x}) = \hat{f}^{(b-1)}(\mathbf{x}) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x}),
```

$$
where $\hat{f}_b(\mathbf{x})$ is the prediction of the $b$-th tree and $\lambda$ is the learning rate. Residuals are updated as:
$$

>     r_i = y_i - \hat{f}(\mathbf{x})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    r_i^{(b)} = y_i - \hat{f}^{(b-1)}(\mathbf{x}_i),
```

As a tradeoff, \gls{etr} is less interpretable than a single decision tree, as the added randomness can introduce more bias than \gls{rf}.
However, it often achieves better generalization performance, especially in high-dimensional or noisy datasets.

\subsubsection{Gradient Boosting Regression (GBR)}\label{sec:gradientboost}
In this section we introduce \gls{gbr} primarily based on \citet{James2023AnIS}.

> \gls{gbr} is an ensemble learning technique that uses a sequence of weak learners, typically decision trees, to build a strong predictive model.

Reviewer: I think it's weird to introduce the term "weak leaner" here, and then immediately after again on line 324, where you even highlight it in italics. The same goes for the decision tree name drop, which you mention on line 330. Why even have this line?

Reviewer 2: I agree that the line doesn't contribute much, as it only says that GBR is an ensemble technique, but then gives a characteristic of ensemble models.
It would make more sense if the sentence directly touched upon what GBR is, as opposed to other ensemble models.

Like:
```suggestion
\gls{gbr} is an ensemble learning method that builds models sequentially, each one trying to correct the errors of the previous one using gradient descent and boosting techniques.
```

> However, in order to explain \gls{gbr}, it is helpful to build on the concepts of ensemble learning and decision trees.

Reviewer 2: We need to be really careful with this. We've (or, we will) explained multiple ensemble techniques. It's important to regard the report as a whole, so having a thorough (and good!) description like this about ensembles generally would likely be best served in the introduction to some subsection for the ensemble, tree-based models we use.

And likewise for the theory surrounding decision trees. Most of the other sections we've already merged could actually benefit (IMO) from relying more on the theory they use. That was also one of my comments on the earlier sections, I think on ETR, that we skim over the split decisions.

E.g.:
- Background
    - ... other sections
    - Tree-based ensemble techniques
        - What are ensembles?
        - Decision trees
        - GBR
        - XGB
        - NGB
        - ETR

Or something. And note the order: XGBoost is a highly optimized gradient boosting implementation, with some additional nice features. So it would likely depend on the GBR section. Likewise with NGB.

Thoughts?

Author: I agree. I forget which section it is (possibly methodology?) we actually categorize our models like this so it could make sense to make the same categorization in our background. However, I think this should be a separate task after we have written all the sections about the models.

Reviewer 2: Sure, but then I don't think you should spend much more time on this task. Focus on the concepts directly relevant to GBR, like boosting & gradient boosting, and not any of the comments regarding decision trees / ensembles / etc.

Author: I made a task in notion for this clean up process.

Ensemble learning is a technique in machine learning where multiple models, known as \textit{weak learners}, are combined to produce more accurate predictions.
Mathematically, ensemble learning can be defined as combining the predictions of $M$ weak learners to form a final prediction $\hat{y}$, such that:
\begin{equation}
    \hat{y} = \sum_{m=1}^{M} \alpha_m \hat{y}_m,
\end{equation}
where $\hat{y}_m$ is the prediction of the $m$-th weak learner and $\alpha_m$ is the weight assigned to the $m$-th weak learner.
While there are various choices for weak learners, decision trees are a common choice.
Decision trees are a core component of gradient boosting methods. 
They partition the data into subsets based on feature values, aiming to create groups where data points have similar predicted outcomes. 

> The quality of a split is measured using various metrics. Some common metrics include impurity, information gain, and Gini index. 

Reviewer: I would argue this line doesn't really bring any useful information - listing terms without explaining them does not provide value It might be better to instead mention, on line 335, that "once optimal splits are identified using some evaluation metric". 

What do you think?

Author: Then it would be something like:
"Once optimal splits are identified, using metrics such as impurity, information gain or Gini index, the tree is constructed by repeatedly partitioning the data until a stopping criterion is met."

Is this to your liking?

Reviewer 2: Gini is impurity, no?
Called Gini impurity.

And missing entropy?

> Decision trees are fundamental to gradient boosting techniques. They work by recursively partitioning the dataset into smaller subsets based on feature values. Each split is chosen to maximize the homogeneity of the resulting subsets, where data points within each subset have similar predicted outcomes. The effectiveness of a split is measured using metrics such as information gain, Gini index, and entropy. These metrics help in selecting the most informative splits to enhance the model's predictive accuracy.

Current text is a little informal.

Also, we've already described decision trees for ETR. I vote we centralize the descriptions, as I mentioned in my earlier review comment. It'll get confusing otherwise.

Once optimal splits are identified, the tree is constructed by repeatedly partitioning the data until a stopping criterion is met.
The final model consists of splits that create distinct regions, each with a predicted response value based on the mean of the observations in that region.

> This leads us to \textit{Gradient Boosting}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads us to \textit{gradient boosting}.
```
Lowercase because it's just a term, not a name.

> Instead of building a single decision tree, gradient boosting constructs multiple trees sequentially, with each new tree correcting the errors of the previous ones.

Reviewer: Might want to elaborate a bit on how it does this? A sentence or two maybe. It's a bit vague right now and I think it's a core concept in gradient boosting.

Reviewer 2: Elaborating here could also explain why it has to be done sequentially.
Obviously, the reason is that the successor depends on the residuals of the predecessor.

It works by fitting the new predictor to the residual errors made by the previous predictor. Here are the basic steps:
```mermaid
flowchart TD
	nm[Start with a naive model]
	mp[Make predictions]
	cl[Calculate loss]
	tnm[Train new model]
	add[Add new model to ensemble]

	nm --> mp
	mp --> cl
	cl --> tnm
	tnm --> add
	add --> mp
```

So basically, we:
1. Start with an initial model – e.g. it predicts a constant value (could be avg. val or `0.5`)
2. Compute gradients – for each instance in the dataset, we compute the gradients of the loss function w.r.t the prediction of the current ensemble (which is initially just the constant)
3. Then we fit a weak learner to the gradients
4. We update the model by adding the new weak learner, and we usually weigh it by a factor, e.g. a learning rate.
5. We repeat steps 2-4 for a fixed number of iterations or until convergence.

Also, you haven't really explained boosting, which seems like a critical piece? Since you already spent time addressing ensembles & decision trees. It would make it easier to explain GBR.

Boosting was originally called hypothesis boosting.
It refers to any ensemble method that combines several weak learners into a strong learner.

The idea is that we can build a strong predictive model by combining several weak models, e.g. decision trees. We train the predictors sequentially, each one trying to correct its predecessor.
A weak model isn't a poorly performing one, but rather, it's a model that does slightly better than random guessing.

The way it works is that we:
1. Start with an initial model, which is a weak model we fit to the data.
2. We calculate the errors / residuals of this initial model.
3. Then we fit another weak model that focuses on the errors made by the previous model.
4. We combine these weak models through weighted averaging.
5. And finally, we repeat steps 2-4 until a specific number of models are built, or no further improvements can be made.

So each of the models are different from the previous one in the sense that the 'next' weak learner tries to 'fix' the errors the previous one made.

You can imagine you have $x$ features, and you are trying to learn some prediction function $F(x)$.

Boosting is where you learn $F(x)$ as the sum of $M$ weak learners.

$$
F(x)=\sum^{M}_{i=1}f_{i}(x)
$$

where $f_{i}(x)$ is the weak learner.

Gradient boosting generalized boosting by allowing optimizations over arbitrary loss functions. It uses gradient descent to find the minimum of the loss function. And since it can optimize any differentiable loss function, it can be adapted to solve a wide variety of tasks.

You can see how GBR works in this simplified example:

```python
import numpy as np
from sklearn.tree import DecisionTreeRegressor

# Generate noisy quadratic dataset
np.random.seed(42)
X = np.random.rand(100, 1) - 0.5
y = 3 * X[:, 0] ** 2 + 0.05 * np.random.randn(100)

# GBRT
tree_reg1 = DecisionTreeRegressor(max_depth=2, random_state=42)
tree_reg1.fit(X, y)

y2 = y - tree_reg1.predict(X)
tree_reg2 = DecisionTreeRegressor(max_depth=2, random_state=43)
tree_reg2.fit(X, y2) # train on residuals made by the first predictor

y3 = y2 - tree_reg2.predict(X)
tree_reg3 = DecisionTreeRegressor(max_depth=2, random_state=44)
tree_reg3.fit(X, y3) # train on residuals made by the second predictor

# 'Test' set
X_new = np.array([[-0.4], [0.], [0.5]])
sum(tree.predict(X_new) for tree in (tree_reg1, tree_reg2, tree_reg3))
> array([0.49484029, 0.04021166, 0.75026781])
```

I also have a ton of notes describing the gradient boosting **trees** aspect, but this comment is already getting long...

> Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's predictions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's prediction.
```
Not sure but isn't this supposed to be "prediction" in singular?

Author: Chatgpts answer to this:
"The correct form is plural "predictions" since it refers to the multiple outcomes provided by a single tree."

But if you feel singular reads better, then I am all for it.

> Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's predictions. 

Reviewer 2: You don't explain what `terminal nodes` are.

Author: I think terminal node is self explanatory in the context of trees.

It also ensures that each tree makes small and simple error corrections, such that each step refines the model's performance more reliably.

> Finally, small trees have the property of high bias, meaning that they are unable to capture complex relationships in the data and low variance.
> By combining multiple small trees, the model can capture complex relationships while maintaining a low variance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Finally, small trees tend to have high bias, meaning they cannot capture complex relationships in the data, but they exhibit low variance.
By combining multiple small trees, the model can effectively capture complex relationships while maintaining low variance
```

Reviewer 2: @Pattrigue @Ivikhostrup Be ready to explain the Bias-Variance tradeoff at the exam, since we mention them here.

@Pattrigue your suggestion has a `"` I think is unintentional. And it seems to be missing a period.

Reviewer 2: And variance isn't explained. A model with high variance is capturing the random noise in the data, mistaking it for true underlying patterns.

> The model is constructed iteratively by adding trees to correct the residuals of the previous trees. 

Reviewer: First time we mention residuals (I think), should we briefly explain what it means?

Author: I was debating with myself if I should just rename it to errors. They are interchangable, but residuals is, AFAIK, grounded more in statistics.
What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Residuals are the differences between observed and predicted values of data in a statistical or machine learning model. Also known as errors.

I'm fine with either. Residuals is a bit more conventional, I think.

> Initially, the prediction is set as $\hat{f}_0(x) = 0$ and residuals as $r_i = y_i$ for all $i$ in the training set, where $x$ represents the input feature(s) and $y$ is the true value or target variable. 

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't $x$ be $\mathbf{x}$ because it's a vector of feature values?

At each iteration $b$, predictions are updated as:
$$
    \hat{f}(x) = \hat{f}(x) + \lambda \hat{f}_b(x)
$$
where $\hat{f}_b(x)$ is the prediction of the $b$-th tree and $\lambda$ is the learning rate. Residuals are updated as:
$$
    r_i = y_i - \hat{f}(x)
$$
Each tree is then trained on these updated residuals. 

> This process of fitting a weak learner to predict the residuals and using its predictions to update the model is repeated for $B$ iterations, culminating in the final model:

Reviewer 2: Where does $B$ come from? Is it a hyperparameter? So, we create $B$ trees total?

Author: Addressed.

While there are various choices for weak learners, decision trees are a common choice.
Decision trees are a core component of gradient boosting methods. 
They partition the data into subsets based on feature values, aiming to create groups where data points have similar predicted outcomes. 

> Once optimal splits based on some evaluation metric, are identified, the tree is constructed by repeatedly partitioning the data until a stopping criterion is met.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once optimal splits are identified, the tree is constructed by repeatedly partitioning the data until a stopping criterion is met.
```

The final model consists of splits that create distinct regions, each with a predicted response value based on the mean of the observations in that region.

This leads us to \textit{gradient boosting}.
Instead of building a single decision tree, gradient boosting constructs multiple trees sequentially, with each new tree correcting the errors of the previous ones.
Each tree is small, with few terminal nodes, preventing large adjustments based on a single tree's predictions. 
It also ensures that each tree makes small and simple error corrections, such that each step refines the model's performance more reliably.

Initially, the prediction is set as $\hat{f}_0(\mathbf{x}) = 0$ and residuals as $r_i = y_i$ for all $i$ in the training set, where $\mathbf{x}$ represents the vector of input feature(s) and $y$ is the true value or target variable. 

> The model is then iteratively improved over $B$ iterations, where $B$ is the total number of trees specified during model configuration. 

Reviewer 2: Hyperparameter are parameters of the algorithm, not the model.

```suggestion
The model is then iteratively improved over $B$ iterations, where $B$ is a hyperparameter controlling the total number of trees.
```

> At each iteration $b \in \{1, 2, \ldots, B\}$, predictions are updated as:

Reviewer 2: Each iteration $b$ from $1$ to $B$ updates the prediction ...

I think what you've written could be correct, but is this clearer?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At each iteration $b$ from $1$ to $b$, predictions are updated as:
```
